At first, the focus was the development of a library that supported standard workflows, like inventory management
for example. In the standard extract, transform and load (ETL) cycle, the 'supplychainpy' library focuses on the
transformation of the data. After more development and some 'dogfooding' (the act of consuming your API),
it made sense to offer a way of extracting and visualising/ dashboarding the analysis before the final loading to
where it may be.

Various options for a database backend and the prospect of mixing different data sources, makes data extraction complicated.
Tools like SQL Server Integration Services for Microsoft SQL Server or writing raw SQL stored procedures represent
the extremes for approaching this problem. All the tools require the analyst to understand the data model and map the
tables in the data warehouse correctly, to maintain accurate business logic.

Supplychainpy currently allows the loading of CSV and text files. To implement a relatively simple way to extract data,
while being database agnostic we needed a way to use OLAP cubes. Enter Bubbles (add link) formerly Databrewery.
The addition of this library as a dependency allows supplychainpy to write the model and leaves the mapping to the
analysts. The supplychainpy library will then use the OLAP pip provided by Bubbles to load the data for analysis.
This feature is currently being explored and if successful will be implemented in planning release-0.0.5.

In the meantime, release-0.0.4 sees the introduction of an interactive web-based dashboard and further analytical
features in the library. Please consult the deep dive (link) for further technical details or the post on Visualising
the supplychainpy library or Inventory analysis.


, what have we built so far, how is it helpful,
